>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, MARCH 5: VOTERS
HAVE THEIR SAY IN PRIMARIES AND
CAUCUSES IN LOUISIANA, MAINE,
NEBRASKA, KENTUCKY, AND KANSAS,
AS DONALD TRUMP AND HILLARY
CLINTON LOOK TO EXPAND THEIR
LEADS IN THE DELEGATES NEEDED TO
SECURE THEIR PARTY'S
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINATIONS.
AND FROM CHICAGO, A ONCE
CONTROVERSIAL ART EXHIBIT ON
RACE IS BROUGHT BACK WITH A NEW
PERSPECTIVE.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS OF
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
RESULTS ARE COMING IN FROM THE
FIVE PRIMARIES AND CAUCUSES
IN THIS YEAR'S PRESIDENTIAL
RACE.
SENATOR TED CRUZ HAS WON THE
REPUBLICAN CAUCUSES IN KANSAS,
ADDING TO HIS WINS IN IOWA,
ALASKA, OKLAHOMA AND HIS HOME
STATE OF TEXAS.
CRUZ CAPTURED 48% OF THE VOTE,
FOLLOWED BY NEW YORK BUSINESSMAN
DONALD TRUMP AT 23%; AND FLORIDA
SENATOR MARCO RUBIO, ABOUT 17%.
CRUZ STANDS TO WIN HALF OF THE
40 DELEGATES KANSAS WILL SEND TO
THE REPUBLICAN NATIONAL
CONVENTION.
HE SPOKE TO SUPPORTERS TONIGHT
IN IDAHO, WHICH HOLDS A
REPUBLICAN PRIMARY ON TUESDAY.
>> AND THE SCREAM YOU HEAR, THE
HOWL THAT COMES FROM WASHINGTON,
D.C., IS UTTER TERROR AT WHAT WE
THE PEOPLE ARE DOING TOGETHER.
>> Sreenivasan: IN MAINE, EARLY
RESULTS SHOWED CRUZ AND TRUMP
VYING FOR FIRST PLACE WITH 23
DELEGATES AT STAKE THERE.
THE REPUBLICANS ALSO COMPETED IN
CAUCUSES IN KENTUCKY.
ON THE DEMOCRATIC SIDE, FORMER
SECRETARY OF STATE HILLARY
CLINTON AND VERMONT SENATOR
BERNIE SANDERS COMPETED IN
CAUCUSES IN KANSAS AND NEBRASKA.
THE FORMER PRESIDENT MADE THE
CASE FOR HIS WIFE IN THE
CORNHUSKER STATE.
>> THE MOST IMPORTANT REASON BY
FAR IS THAT SHE'S THE BEST
CHANGEMAKER I EVER MET.
>> Sreenivasan: CLINTON IS
LOOKING AHEAD TO THE NEXT BIG
PRIMARY TUESDAY IN MICHIGAN AND
TOUTED HER ECONOMIC PLAN TODAY
IN DETROIT.
>> I WANT TO BUILD ON THE
PROGRESS PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS
MADE.
I AM ABSOLUTELY IN HIS CORNER.
I DON'T THINK HE GETS THE CREDIT
HE DESERVES FOR SAVING OUR
ECONOMY WHEN HE WAS HANDED THE
WORST FINANCIAL CRISIS SINCE THE
GREAT DEPRESSION.
>> Sreenivasan: SHE'LL FACE OFF
WITH SANDERS IN A NATIONALLY
TELEVISED DEBATE TOMORROW NIGHT
IN MICHIGAN WHERE HE'S BROUGHT
HIS MESSAGE OF A "RIGGED
ECONOMY."
>> NAFTA AND PERMANENT TRADE
RELATIONS WITH CHINA HAVE COST
THIS COUNTRY MILLIONS OF DECENT-
PAYING JOBS.
I FOUGHT EVERY ONE OF THESE
TRADE AGREEMENTS.
>> Sreenivasan: LOUISIANA HELD
PRIMARIES FOR BOTH PARTIES
TODAY, AND ABOUT A QUARTER OF
LOUISIANA'S REGISTERED VOTERS
WERE EXPECTED TO TURN OUT.
>> DO I LOVE LOUISIANA?
I LOVE LOUISIANA!
THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: TRUMP TOPPED
PRE-PRIMARY POLLS IN LOUISIANA,
BUT THE PRIMARY WAS RESTRICTED
TO REGISTERED REPUBLICANS.
>> THIS IS BETTER THAN REAL
ESTATE.
THIS IS MORE FUN.
>> Sreenivasan: RUBIO HAS BEEN
TELLING AUDIENCES THAT A VOTE
FOR TRUMP, WHO LEADS IN
CONVENTION DELEGATES, IS A
MISTAKE.
>> IF HE'S OUR NOMINEE, IT WILL
SPLIT THE REPUBLICAN PARTY, AND
IT WILL BE THE END OF THE MODERN
CONSERVATIVE MOVEMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: OHIO GOVERNOR
JOHN KASICH IS ALSO CAMPAIGNING
NEXT DOOR TO HIS HOME STATE IN
MICHIGAN AND TOUTING HIS
EXPERIENCE IN CONGRESS WRITING A
BALANCED FEDERAL BUDGET IN THE
1990s.
>> BALANCING THE BUDGET, IT
MATTERS BECAUSE THE DEBT'S NOW
GETTING SO HIGH.
BUT THE REAL PROBLEM WITH IT, IT
KEEPS US FROM GETTING THE JOBS
WE WANT.
>> Sreenivasan: KASICH CAME IN
FOURTH IN KANSAS.
IN WINNING THE STATE, CRUZ
FOLLOWED IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF THE
PAST TWO REPUBLICAN CAUCUS
WINNERS THERE-- RICK SANTORUM
AND MIKE HUCKABEE-- BY
POSITIONING HIMSELF AS THE MOST
SOCIALLY CONSERVATIVE CANDIDATE,
WITH APPEALS TO CHRISTIAN
EVANGELICALS WHO MAKE UP ONE-
THIRD OF THE KANSAS ELECTORATE.
ON THE DEMOCRATIC SIDE, BERNIE
SANDERS HAS WON THE CAUCUSES IN
KANSAS, ACCORDING TO THE STATE'S
DEMOCRATIC PARTY.
40,000 VOTERS PARTICIPATED, AND
KANSAS DEMOCRATS SAW A LARGER
TURNOUT THAN IN 2008.
FOR MORE ON THE RESULTS IN BOTH
PARTIES IN KANSAS, I'M JOINED BY
"KANSAS CITY STAR" POLITICAL
REPORTER DAVE HELLING.
DAVE, THE NUMBERS FOR CRUZ
PERHAPS BEEN EXPECTED THE FACT
HE WAS SUPPOSED TO WIN BUT THE
MARGIN THAT HE WON BY, ARE YOU
SURPRISED BY THAT?
>> EVERYONE'S SURPRISED.
TWO TO ONE MARGIN FOR TED CRUZ
OUT IN KANSAS WE ALL UNDERSTAND
THAT THIS IS A VERY STRONGLY
RELIGIOUS STATE ON THE
REPUBLICAN SIDE.
MIKE HUCKABEE WON IN 2008.
RICK SANTORUM RUN.
THE CRUZ VICTORY WAS NOT A
SURPRISE.
BUT EVERYONE EXPECTED THAT
DONALD TRUMP WOULD DO MUCH
BETTER THAN HE DID AND GET MUCH
CLOSER TO THE SENATOR FROM TEXAS
THAN HE DID, WE'VE DISCUSSED
THAT MAY BE A PROBLEM FOR DONALD
TRUMP.
HE CONTINUES TO STRUGGLE IN
CLOSE STATES, WE'RE ONLY
REPUBLICANS CAN VOTE.
KANSAS WAS JUST SUCH A STATE.
ON SATURDAY AND HE FELL FAR
BEHIND TED CRUZ.
SCREEN THERE WERE ANY
INDICATIONS THAT THE TONE OR TEN
OR OF THE CONVERSATIONS IN THE
PAST FEW WEEKS HAVE CHANGED THE
MIND EVER KANSAS VOTE?
>> YOU DON'T GET THAT SENSE.
YOU GET THE SENSE THAT TED CRUZ
IS VERY POPULAR WITH RELIGIOUS
CONSERVATIVES, ALWAYS HAVE BEEN.
THOSE ARE THE VERY PEOPLE THAT
ALWAYS GO TO CAUCUS HERE IN
KANSAS.
AS I SUGGESTED THEY DID SO IN
THE LAST TWO CAUCUSES HERE.
I DON'T THINK ANYONE WAS
SURPRISED BY THAT.
NOW, DONALD TRUMP DID MAKE A
LAST MINUTE APPEARANCE IN KANSAS
SATURDAY IN WICHITA, TRYING TO
RALLY SOME VOTES AND I DID TALK
TO CAUCUS GOERS TODAY WHO
SUPPORT DONALD TRUMP, THEY'RE
ALL VERY FRUSTRATED WITH
GOVERNMENT AND SO THAT'S A VERY
REAL THING HERE AS IT IS IN
OTHER STATES.
IT JUST WASN'T ENOUGH TO GET HIM
ANYWHERE NEAR THE CRUZ
POPULARITY.
SCREEN YOU WERE OUT AT SOME OF
THE POLLS WHAT DID YOU HEAR FROM
THE VOTERS?
>> THE FRUSTRATION THAT I JUST
TALKED ABOUT A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE
VERY UPSET WITH WASHINGTON.
ONE CAUCUS GOER TOLD ME NOTHING
GETS DONE, SHE REUNITE FOR
EMPHASIS.
YOU ALSO GET THE SENSE THAT SOME
OF THE CAUCUS GOERS ARE VERY
UPSET AT THE TONE OF THE
CAMPAIGN.
ONE OF THE REPUBLICANS I TALKED
WITH SAID THAT SHE DOESN'T
LISTEN ANY MORE BECAUSE SHE'S
DISAPPOINTED AND DISGUSTED WITH
THE TONE OF THE DEBATE AND
DISAGREEMENTS PARTICULARLY ON
THE REPUBLICAN SIDE.
WE'LL HAVE TO SEE IF THAT
TRANSLATES INTO CONCERN AS WE
HEAD TO THE GENERAL ELECTION OR
EVEN AS WE GET CLOSER TO THE
CONVENTION BECAUSE IT'S NOT
CLEAR THAT IT CHANGED ANY VOTES
BUT PEOPLE ARE FED UP WITH THE
LANGUAGE IN THE CAMPAIGN I THINK
AND THEY ARE FED UP WITH
WASHINGTON.
SCREEN LET'S TALK ON THE
DEMOCRATIC.
LIKELY TO GO TO BERNIE SANDERS,
ANY SURPRISE THERE 124.
>> BREAKING NEWS, RIGHT?
THEY JUST ANNOUNCED 90% HAVE
BEEN COUNTED THEY DECLARED
SENATOR SANDERS THE WINNER.
WE DON'T KNOW THE MARGIN, SO,
YOU WANT TO WAIT A LITTLE BIT
UNTIL YOU UNDERSTAND WHETHER
IT'S A TEN-POINT VICTORY FOR TWO
POINT VICTORY.
BUT I DO THINK IT REFLECTS THE
NATURE OF CAUCUSES.
THEY ALWAYS SEND TO ATTRACT, THE
MORE COMMITTED VOTER, THOSE WHO
ARE MORE ENERGETIC ABOUT THEIR
CANDIDATE AND THERE'S NO
QUESTION THAT IN KANSAS BERNIE
SANDERS HAS MORE OR HAD MORE
ENERGY THAN HILLARY CLINTON.
HILLARY CLINTON HAD A LOT OF
ORGANIZATIONS BUT NEVER VISITED
THE STATE TO CAMPAIGN HERE.
BERNIE SANDERS ON THE OTHER HAND
WAS HERE THURSDAY.
HE WAS HERE THE WEEK BEFORE IN
KANSAS CITY, HE HAD A HUGE CROWD
THERE'S JUST MORE ENERGY WITH
SENATOR SANDERS ON SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: MUST CLINTON
LOST THERE LAST ROUND.
>> IN 2008 TO BARACK OBAMA WHERE
THE SAME PHENOMENON PLAYED OUT.
YOU WOULD NOT THINK THAT SOMEONE
LIKE BARACK OBAMA, THE FIRST
AFRICAN AMERICAN CANDIDATE WOULD
DO WELL IN A STATE LIKE KANSAS.
BUT HE DID QUITE WELL BECAUSE OF
THE COMMITTED VOTERS WHO TURNED
OUT IN LARGE NUMBERS.
NOW, TURN OUT TODAY WAS MUCH
LARGER IN KANSAS ON THE
DEMOCRATIC SIDE THAN IT WAS IN
2008.
SO, THAT SHOWS YOU THE
ENTHUSIASM NOR THE SENATOR.
WHETHER THAT HELPS HIM DOWN THE
ROAD WE'LL HAVE TO SEE.
BUT ON THIS SATURDAY AT LEAST
BERNIE SANDERS WAS QUITE THE
ATTRACTION FOR KANSAS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
KANSAS CITY STAR POLITICAL
REPORTER DAVE HELLING.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> YOU BET.
>> Sreenivasan: LOUISIANA IS A
STATE THAT FORMER PRESIDENT BILL
CLINTON WON TWICE-- IN THE 1992
AND 1996 GENERAL ELECTIONS-- BUT
NO DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATE HAS WON IT SINCE.
FORMER FIRST LADY HILLARY
CLINTON-- SHOULD SHE BECOME THIS
YEAR'S DEMOCRATIC NOMINEE--
COULD AIM TO REVERSE THAT LOSING
STREAK.
JOINING ME NOW TO DISCUSS HOW
THE CAMPAIGN IN BOTH PARTIES HAS
PLAYED OUT BEFORE TODAY'S
LOUISIANA PRIMARY VOTERS IS
ELIZABETH CRISP, A POLITICAL
REPORTER FOR THE "BATON ROUGE
ADVOCATE."
SO, NONE OF THE CANDIDATES ARE
IN TOWN TODAY.
WHAT'S THE ACTIVITY BEEN LIKE IN
LOUISIANA WITH THE CANDIDATES
OVER THE PAST FEW DAYS?
>> AFTER SUPER TUESDAY, WE
STARTED SEEING MORE ACTIVITY
FROM THE CANDIDATES.
LAST NIGHT, DONALD TRUMP WAS IN
NEW ORLEANS.
TED CRUZ WAS IN THE NEW ORLEANS
AREA.
BILL CLINTON HAS BEEN IN
LOUISIANA FOR THE PAST TWO DAYS.
AND SO, IT REALLY SEEMED TO KIND
OF SPIKE AS TODAY APPROACHED.
>> Sreenivasan: I KNOW THAT
FORMER GOVERNOR BOBBY JINDAL HAD
ENDORSED RUBIO, BUT HE CANCELED
ONE OF HIS LAST TRIPS.
>> YEAH, MARCO RUBIO WAS
SUPPOSED TO BE IN BATON ROUGE
LAST NIGHT.
AFTER SUPER TUESDAY, HIS
CAMPAIGN ANNOUNCED THAT HE WAS
RESHIFTING HIS EFFORTS TO FOCUS
ON AREAS WHERE THEY THOUGHT HE
COULD BE MORE EFFECTIVE.
AND SO, TO A LOT OF PEOPLE HERE
IN LOUISIANA, I THINK THAT KIND
OF SIGNALED THAT HE WASN'T GOING
TO PERFORM VERY WELL HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO IS THIS A
TRUMP VS. CRUZ SORT OF SHOWDOWN
OR IS IT EXPECTED TO GO TOWARDS
TRUMP?
>> IT IS INTERESTING.
IN LOUISIANA, WE HAVE NOT HAD A
LOT OF POLLS HERE, SO A LOT OF
PEOPLE ARE WONDERING WHICH WAY
IT WILL GO.
THE FEW WE HAVE SEEN, AND IT HAS
BEEN IN THE MOST RECENT DAYS,
HAVE SHOWN TRUMP WITH A PRETTY
SIZABLE LEAD, BUT LOUISIANA'S
INTERESTING BECAUSE IT IS A
CLOSED PRIMARY STATE.
SO ONLY REGISTERED REPUBLICANS
WILL BE ABLE TO VOTE, AND SO A
LOT OF PEOPLE ARE SEEING THIS AS
POSSIBLY TED CRUZ'S CHANCE TO
KIND OF COME THROUGH.
>> Sreenivasan: AND WHAT ABOUT
ON THE DEMOCRATIC SIDE?
WHAT'S THE CAMPAIGNING BEEN LIKE
BETWEEN HILLARY AND BERNIE?
>> ON THE DEMOCRATIC SIDE WE'VE
DEFINITELY SEEN A LOT MORE
ACTIVITY FROM HILLARY CLINTON'S
CAMPAIGN.
I KNOW THAT THERE'S A LOT OF
GRASSROOTS ACTIVITY FOR BERNIE
SANDERS HERE, BUT REALLY WHEN
YOU LOOK AT THE DEMOGRAPHICS,
LIKE A LOT OF SOUTHERN STATES
THAT WE'VE SEEN ALREADY THAT
WENT ON SUPER TUESDAY, IT JUST
REALLY SEEMS TO BE TILTED
HEAVILY IN HILLARY CLINTON'S
FAVOR.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, ELIZABETH,
ON BOTH SIDE OF THE AISLE, WHAT
ARE THE ISSUES THAT ARE
RESONATING WITH THE VOTERS THAT
YOU'VE BEEN SPEAKING WITH?
>> IT REALLY IS A LOT ABOUT THE
ECONOMY.
BUT I THINK THAT WHAT WE'RE
SEEING FROM A LOT OF PEOPLE ON
THE TRUMP SIDE IN PARTICULAR FOR
THEM IT REALLY IS AN ISSUE ABOUT
THEY FEEL LIKE THEIR COUNTRY HAS
SOMEHOW GOTTEN OFF TRACK AND
NEEDS TO BE, YOU KNOW-- THAT
NEEDS TO BE RIGHTED.
I HEARD A LOT PEOPLE SAYING THEY
FEEL HE'S THE STRONGEST ON
VETERANS ISSUES, EVEN AS
CONTROVERSIAL AS HIS COMMENTS
MAY BE ABOUT IMMIGRATION, HE HAS
A LOT OF PEOPLE WHO FEEL LIKE HE
IS TELLING IT AS IT IS.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE A
RACIAL DIMENSION HOW PEOPLE TURN
OUT IN LOUISIANA?
>> THERE DEFINITELY IS.
THE RALLY THAT WE HAD THE OTHER
NIGHT, WHERE FORMER PRESIDENT
BILL CLINTON WAS HERE, IT WAS A
VERY DIVERSE CROWD.
IT WAS A LOT OF UNION SUPPORTERS
AND A LOT OF AFRICAN AMERICAN
VOTERS THERE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
ELIZABETH CRISP FROM THE "BATON
ROUGE ADVOCATE," THANK YOU SO
MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANKS.
>> Sreenivasan: KEEP TRACK OF
THE RESULTS AND DELEGATES
AWARDED IN TODAY'S FIVE
PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARIES AND
CAUCUSES ON OUR WEB SITE,
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE ARE
GROWING PROTESTS IN TURKEY'S
CAPITAL OVER PRESS CENSORSHIP.
RIOT POLICE FIRED TEAR GAS,
RUBBER BULLETS AND WATER CANONS
FOR A SECOND DAY TO DISPERSE
HUNDREDS OF DEMONSTRATORS
AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT TAKEOVER
OF "ZAMAN," TURKEY'S MOST WIDELY
READ NEWSPAPER.
IN ITS FINAL EDITION PUBLISHED
TODAY BEFORE THE TAKEOVER, THE
NEWSPAPER SAID THE TURKISH PRESS
IS GOING THROUGH "ONE OF THE
DARKEST DAYS IN ITS HISTORY."
"ZAMAN" IS OWNED BY A LEADING
POLITICAL OPPONENT OF PRESIDENT
RECEP ERDOGAN-- FETHULLAH GULEN,
A CLERIC WHO HAS LIVED IN THE
U.S. SINCE 1999.
THE TURKISH GOVERNMENT HAS
ACCUSED GULEN OF PLOTTING A
COUP.
EUROPEAN OFFICIALS AND HUMAN
RIGHTS GROUPS ARE CONDEMNING THE
NEWSPAPER TAKEOVER AS A BLOW TO
PRESS FREEDOM.
THE CEASE-FIRE IN SYRIA'S CIVIL
WAR IS A WEEK OLD TODAY, AND
WHILE ALL SIDES CONTINUE TO
REPORT SOME VIOLATIONS, THE
FIGHTING HAS SLOWED
CONSIDERABLY.
THE BRITISH-BASED SYRIAN
OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
SAYS AT LEAST 135 PEOPLE DIED IN
THE PAST WEEK IN AREAS COVERED
BY THE CEASE-FIRE.
THE MONITORING GROUP ALSO SAYS
MORE THAN 550 PEOPLE DIED IN
PARTS OF SYRIA CONTROLLED BY
ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS AND THE
AL QAEDA-LINKED NUSRA FRONT,
GROUPS THAT ARE NOT PART OF THE
TRUCE BROKERED BY THE U.S. AND
RUSSIA.
IN REBEL-HELD TERRITORY IN
NORTHERN SYRIA, WHERE FIGHTING
HAS LARGELY STOPPED, PROTESTERS
HAVE TAKEN TO THE STREETS TO
CALL FOR THE OUSTER OF SYRIAN
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-ASSAD, A
SIGHT RARELY SEEN IN RECENT
YEARS.
THE LULL IN THE FIGHTING HAS
ALLOWED UNITED NATIONS AID
CONVOYS TO REACH TOWNS IN
DESPERATE NEED OF SUPPLIES.
25 TRUCKS MADE IT TO THE
DAMASCUS AREA YESTERDAY.
THE U.N. ENVOY FOR SYRIA SAID
TODAY HE HOPES PEACE TALKS IN
GENEVA CAN RESUME NEXT WEEK.
THE PHILIPPINES' HAS IMPOUNDED A
NORTH KOREAN CARGO SHIP AT A
PORT NEAR MANILA.
THIS COMES JUST DAYS AFTER THE
UNITED NATIONS IMPOSED TOUGHER
SANCTIONS ON NORTH KOREA FOR
CARRYING OUT NUCLEAR WEAPONS
TESTS.
FILIPINO COAST GUARD PERSONNEL
INITIALLY BOARDED AND INSPECTED
THE SHIP ON THURSDAY.
IT HAD BEEN HEADED TO CHINA WITH
A LOAD OF ANIMAL FEED.
THE PHILIPPINES GOVERNMENT SAYS
IT WILL DEPORT THE CREW OF 21
NORTH KOREANS.
ELON MUSK, THE C.E.O. OF THE
PRIVATELY-OWNED SPACE
EXPLORATION COMPANY SPACE-X,
SAYS HIS NEXT ROCKET LAUNCH HAS
A GOOD CHANCE OF A NAILING THE
LANDING AND MAKING IT EASIER TO
REUSE THE ROCKET.
AFTER DELIVERING A
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SATELLITE
INTO ORBIT ABOVE THE EARTH
YESTERDAY, THE FALCON 9 ROCKET
"LANDED HARD" ON A PLATFORM IN
THE PACIFIC OCEAN.
THIS WAS SPACE-X'S FOURTH
ATTEMPT TO LAND A ROCKET AT SEA.
BEST-SELLING SOUTHERN NOVELIST
PAT CONROY HAS DIED.
HIS BOOKS SOLD MORE THAN 20
MILLION COPIES AROUND THE WORLD,
AND THREE OF THE BEST-KNOWN,
"THE GREAT SANTINI," "THE PRINCE
OF TIDES" AND "LORDS OF
DISCIPLINE," WERE MADE INTO
MOVIES.
IN THE ADAPTATION OF "THE GREAT
SANTINI," ROBERT DUVALL PLAYED
THE ABUSIVE MARINE CORPS FIGHTER
PILOT BASED ON CONROY'S OWN
FATHER.
>> YOU'RE GOING TO SEE A FLOOR
SHOW THE LIKES OF WHICH IS GOING
TO MAKE MARINE CORPS HISTORY.
>> Sreenivasan: CONROY ONCE
SAID, "THE REASON I WRITE IS TO
EXPLAIN MY LIFE TO MYSELF."
HE DIED OF PANCREATIC CANCER AT
HIS HOME IN BEAUFORT, SOUTH
CAROLINA, YESTERDAY.
HE WAS 70 YEARS OLD.
AND TENNIS WRITER AND
BROADCASTER BUD COLLINS HAS
DIED.
HE WAS BEST KNOWN FOR HIS
COLORFUL COMMENTARY AND OUTFITS,
COVERING WIMBLEDON AND OTHER
TOURNAMENTS FOR NBC DURING HIS
35 YEARS WITH THE NETWORK.
COLLINS WAS INDUCTED INTO THE
INTERNATIONAL TENNIS HALL OF
FAME IN 1994, AND THE U.S. OPEN
NAMED ITS MEDIA CENTER AFTER HIM
LAST YEAR.
COLLINS DIED YESTERDAY AT HIS
HOME IN BROOKLINE,
MASSACHUSETTS, AFTER SUFFERING
FROM PARKINSON'S DISEASE.
HE WAS 86.
>> Sreenivasan: CHICAGO'S FIELD
MUSEUM HAS REVIVED A
CONTROVERSIAL SCULPTURE EXHIBIT
CONCEIVED MORE THAN 80 YEARS
AGO.
THE EXHIBIT IS INTENDED TO SPARK
DEBATE ABOUT THE DEPICTION OF
DIFFERENT RACES.
THE NEWSHOUR'S MEGAN THOMPSON
REPORTS.
>> Reporter: AT CHICAGO'S FIELD
MUSEUM, THESE BRONZE STATUES
RELEGATED TO STORAGE FOR DECADES
ARE BACK ON DISPLAY IN A
CONSCIOUS ATTEMPT TO BE
PROVOCATIVE ABOUT THE HOT-BUTTON
TOPIC OF RACE.
ALAKA WALI IS AN ANTHROPOLOGIST
AND CURATOR OF THE EXHIBIT.
>> ...TO GET THE CONVERSATION
GOING AROUND THESE ISSUES USING
THIS AMAZING ARTWORK TO DO THAT.
>> Reporter: THE STORY OF THIS
EXHIBIT STARTS IN THE LATE
1920s WITH MALVINA HOFFMAN, AN
AMERICAN SCULPTOR WHO LIVED IN
PARIS AND HAD STUDIED WITH
AUGUSTE RODIN.
THE FIELD MUSEUM COMMISSIONED
HER TO SCULPT 104 SO-CALLED
"RACIAL TYPES" THAT THE CURATORS
WANTED TO DEPICT.
>> AND THEY WERE LIKE, "WE WANT
ONE OF THIS TYPE, WE WANT ONE OF
THAT TYPE."
THEY THOUGHT THAT SHE COULD SORT
OF CREATE THIS COMPOSITE FROM
DIFFERENT PEOPLE INTO THIS ONE
TYPE THAT WOULD REPRESENT THE
ENTIRE POPULATION.
>> Reporter: HOFFMAN TOOK MORE
THAN THREE YEARS TO CREATE THE
MOSTLY BRONZE SCULPTURES BASED
ON PHOTOGRAPHS AND LIVE MODELS.
>> AND THEN SHE TRAVELED THE
WORLD.
SHE WENT BY BOAT, SHE WENT BY
CAMEL.
SHE WENT BY ELEPHANT TO PARTS OF
ASIA, PARTS OF AFRICA, MET
PEOPLE, ENCOUNTERED THEM.
>> Reporter: THE MUSEUM UNVEILED
THE "RACES OF MANKIND" EXHIBIT
IN 1933 TO COINCIDE WITH THE
CHICAGO WORLD'S FAIR.
THE EXHIBIT WAS POPULAR AND
REMAINED ON DISPLAY FOR DECADES.
AT THE TIME, RACIAL DIVISIONS IN
THE U.S. WERE STARK AND MANY
PARTS OF THE WORLD REMAINED
COLONIZED.
SOME SCIENTISTS AND
ANTHROPOLOGISTS CLASSIFIED
PEOPLE IN RACIAL GROUPS BASED ON
BIOLOGICAL TRAITS, LIKE HOW A
PERSON LOOKED.
SOME GROUPS WERE CONSIDERED MORE
ADVANCED THAN OTHERS.
>> SO THEY STARTED COMING UP
WITH THESE CATEGORIES--
PRIMITIVE, BARBARIC-- AND THE
ONLY ONES WHO COULD BE
CONSIDERED CIVILIZED WERE THE
EUROPEANS.
>> Reporter: WALI SAYS TODAY THE
THEORIES ARE CONSIDERED
"SCIENTIFIC RACISM."
BUT THE THINKING INFLUENCED
HOFFMAN'S WORK.
FOR EXAMPLE, A CHISELED BODY
BUILDER FROM BROOKLYN-- DEPICTED
ALMOST LIKE A GREEK GOD-- WAS
CHOSEN TO PORTRAY THE "NORDIC"
TYPE.
>> CLASSIC FEATURES OF WHAT THE
STEREOTYPE OF A NORTHERN
EUROPEAN WOULD BE.
>> Reporter: ON THE OTHER HAND,
SCULPTURES OF THE SAN PEOPLE OF
SOUTHERN AFRICA'S KALAHARI
DESERT SHOWED A MOTHER CROUCHED
ON THE GROUND AND A FATHER WITH
A BOW AND ARROW.
>> THEY WERE CONSIDERED AMONG
THE MOST PRIMITIVE OF THE
PRIMITIVE BECAUSE AT THE TIME
THEY WERE STILL A PEOPLE WHO
WERE WHAT WE IN ANTHROPOLOGY
WOULD CALL HUNTER-GATHERERS OR
FORAGERS.
>> Reporter: BUT THE SAN WEREN'T
PRIMITIVE AT ALL; THEY EXTRACTED
AN EXTREMELY NUTRITIOUS DIET
FROM THE BARREN DESERT AND HAD
COMPLEX TRADITIONS OF
STORYTELLING, MUSIC AND ART.
HOFFMAN SOMETIMES DISAGREED WITH
THE FIELD MUSEUM CURATORS.
SHE WASN'T COMFORTABLE CREATING
A COMPOSITE OF EACH RACIAL TYPE,
LIKE THEY WANTED.
>> SHE SAID, "NO, THESE PEOPLE
ARE INDIVIDUALS."
BECAUSE SHE WAS TALKING TO THEM,
YOU KNOW, IN HER TRAVELS.
YOU HAVE TO SEE THESE PEOPLE AS
INDIVIDUALS.
AND SO, THERE WAS THAT KIND OF
TENSION.
>> Reporter: HOFFMAN PREVAILED;
EACH STATUE WAS OF AN ACTUAL
PERSON, AND THE NEW EXHIBIT
LISTS MANY OF THEIR REAL NAMES.
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE SAW THE
STATUES DURING THE NEXT 30
YEARS.
BUT BY THE 1960s, THINKING ABOUT
RACE HAD CHANGED.
CULTURE, NOT BIOLOGY, EXPLAINS
DIFFERENCES IN HOW PEOPLE LIVE
AND BEHAVE.
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PROFESSOR
MICHAEL DAWSON, WHO SPECIALIZES
IN THE POLITICS OF RACE AND
ETHNICITY, SAYS WHILE THE
SCULPTURES MAY BE WORKS OF ART,
THE EXHIBIT WAS BASED ON ARCHAIC
IDEAS OF RACE THAT HAVE BEEN
ABANDONED.
>> BY THE 1960s AND 1970s,
THERE'S REAL PUSHBACK ON EITHER
CULTURAL OR BIOLOGICAL
CONCEPTIONS OF RACE,
PARTICULARLY THOSE THAT WERE
ASSOCIATED WITH SOME TYPE OF
HIERARCHY OR SOME TYPE OF SENSE
OF ONE RACE BEING SUPERIOR, EVEN
IF IT'S CULTURALLY SUPERIOR.
>> Reporter: BY THE 1960s, MUCH
OF AFRICA AND ASIA WERE DE-
COLONIZED, AND, IN THE U.S., THE
CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT, INCLUDING
THE BLACK POWER MOVEMENT,
CHANGED ATTITUDES.
>> SO WHAT YOU SAW IN CHICAGO
AND THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY WAS
VERY ANGRY POPULATIONS THAT WERE
VERY WELL ORGANIZED AND VERY
MOBILIZED AND WERE THINKING AT A
VERY FUNDAMENTAL WAY, "HOW DO WE
CHANGE INSTITUTIONS TO MAKE THEM
MORE JUST?"
>> Reporter: IN 1969, THE MUSEUM
REMOVED THE "RACES OF MANKIND"
EXHIBIT.
>> THE NEW GENERATIONS OF
CURATORS WERE UNCOMFORTABLE.
THEY WERE EMBARRASSED BY THE
EXHIBIT BY THAT POINT.
>> Reporter: THE STATUES WERE
SCATTERED AROUND THE MUSEUM OR
PUT IN STORAGE.
BUT WALI SAYS SHE FELT THEY
COULD SERVE A PURPOSE ONCE
AGAIN.
>> YOU DON'T WANT TO WASTE THAT
OPPORTUNITY THEN TO TALK VERY
OPENLY ABOUT THE HISTORY OF RACE
IN OUR COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: AFTER A MAJOR
RESTORATION PROJECT, THE MUSEUM
REMOUNTED 50 OF THE STATUES IN A
NEW EXHIBIT CALLED "LOOKING AT
OURSELVES: RETHINKING THE
SCULPTURES OF MALVINA HOFFMAN."
IT CONTAINS A SECTION ON THE
"BLACK LIVES MATTER" MOVEMENT OF
TODAY.
DIGITAL DISPLAYS COUNTER OLD
NOTIONS LINKING HUMAN BEHAVIOR
WITH PHYSICAL TRAITS.
MICHAEL DAWSON SAYS THE EXHIBIT
HELPS PUT RACIAL
MISUNDERSTANDING IN A HISTORICAL
CONTEXT.
>> I DON'T KNOW HOW WE MOVE
FORWARD UNLESS WE UNDERSTAND OUR
PAST BETTER, AND HAVE A
DISCUSSION ABOUT HOW THAT PAST
STILL AFFECTS US.
>> Reporter: THE FIELD MUSEUM
EXHIBIT WILL BE ON DISPLAY
THROUGH THE END OF THE YEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: VOTING HAS ENDED
IN THE REPUBLICAN CAUCUSES IN
MAINE AND KENTUCKY, AND TED CRUZ
HAS WON IN MAINE, ACCORDING TO
THE STATE'S REPUBLICAN PARTY
THERE.
CRUZ AND DONALD TRUMP WERE ALSO
VYING FOR FIRST PLACE IN
KENTUCKY.
BESIDES MAINE AND KANSAS, CRUZ
ALSO CAME OUT ON TOP TODAY IN A
NON-BINDING STRAW POLL AT THE
CONSERVATIVE POLITICAL ACTION
COMMITTEE CONFERENCE IN
MARYLAND.
CRUZ WAS FAVORED BY 40% OF THE
2,700 CPAC CONFERENCE ATTENDEES
FROM AROUND THE COUNTRY.
RUBIO WAS FAVORED BY 30%; AND
DONALD TRUMP, 15%.
REMEMBER TO FOLLOW ALL OF
TODAY'S RESULTS-- INCLUDING THE
LOUISIANA PRIMARIES WHEN POLLS
CLOSE IN A FEW MOMENTS--
ONLINE AT www.pbs.org/newshour.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.